(theme music playing)
This week on "VICE,"
the inside story
of America's
surveillance program.
I'm gonna be
detaching the camera.
The devices that you paid for
watch you on our behalf.
It seems like
technology allows
almost anyone to spy
on almost anyone.
Snowden:
Even if you trust
the government today,
what happens
when it changes?
When eventually we get
an individual who says,
"You know what?
Let's flip that switch"?
(theme music playing)
Advertise your product or brand here
contact www.OpenSubtitles.org today
(screaming)
(crowd chanting)
Hands up! Don't shoot!
Hands up!
¶ ¶
Smith:
First of all,
I'd like to say
thank you
for meeting us today
here at the storied
Hotel Metropol in Moscow.
I say "storied"
because for the longest time,
it was the designated hotel
where foreigners were
allowed to stay,
and it was rumored
that every room was bugged.
(laughs)
I would definitely presume
that in any world capital,
or in major business hotel,
Mm.
if the h-- hotel rooms
aren't pre-wired
for surveillance,
they can be wired
almost immediately.
¶ ¶
For the last three years,
a controversy has raged
about the US government's
surveillance
of its own people.
A terrorist attack
last December
in San Bernardino, California,
brought this debate
to a tipping point.
Reporter:
14 people are dead
and 21 people
have been injured
after a married couple
opened fire
at the Inland
Regional Center
in San Bernardino.
Reporter 2:
A judge is ordering Apple
to help the FBI
break into a cell phone
used by one of
the San Bernardino shooters.
Apple is saying, "Look,
this is something that
no court can order us to do."
Tim Cook:
What is at stake here is
can the government
compel Apple
to write software
that we believe would make
hundreds of millions
of customers vulnerable
around the world?
If it is possible to make
an impenetrable device,
how do we solve
or disrupt a terrorist plot?
Smith:  But according to
the most famous whistleblower
in the world,
the government already had
this capability...
and as it turned out,
Snowden was proved right
'cause the FBI was able
to crack the iPhone
without Apple's help.
Now, Edward Snowden remains
a polarizing figure
in American politics
because on one side,
he's considered a hero
on the level of Woodward
and Bernstein, who broke
the Watergate scandal,
but on the other,
he's considered
a traitor who jeopardized
American intelligence
and security
around the world.
A traitor!
A traitor
to the United States!
These records were
spread about publicly
by Edward Snowden
internationally,
recklessly,
and, I might say, illegally.
Smith:
So, we went to Moscow
to speak to
this controversial figure
about the state
of surveillance
in America today.
So NSA, CIA, FBI,
can they get into my phone?
Yes.
Can they get into my laptop?
Absolutely.
iPad, any--
Anything.
As long as they can dedicate
people, money, and time
to the target,
they can get in.
And what kind
of information
can they get
from my phone, for example?
Uh, everything
in your contacts list,
every, uh, SMS message
that you use,
every place that's ever been
where the phone
is physically located,
even if you've got
GPS disabled
because they can see
which wireless access points
are near you.
Every part
of a private life today
is found on someone's phone.
We used to say a man's home
is his castle.
Today, a man's phone
My question to you is,
why don't more people care?
Because we've gone
from Cold War, pre-9/11,
to effectively
a police state
that's watching
your every move,
and everyone went, "Eh."
Why?
Part of it is the fact
that it happened invisibly.
Mm-hmm.
Uh...
if a politician had said,
"We want to watch
everybody in the country,"
uh, people would've been
up in arms about it.
¶ ¶
Snowden:
In the wake
of September 11th,
the Vice President
of the United States,
Dick Cheney,
and his personal lawyer,
David Addington,
conspired with a number
of top level officials
in the NSA
and other agencies to change
not only what
they considered to be
the legal restraints,
but actually the culture
of surveillance
in the Intelligence Community.
They moved from
the exceptional surveillance
to the surveillance
of everyone.
Technology has changed.
Instead of sending people
to follow you,
we use the devices
that you paid for.
Mm.
The services
and the systems
that surround you
invisibly every day
to watch you
on our behalf.
Meta data is the fact
that a communication occurred.
So, I called you--
You called me,
when you called me,
where you called me from,
this information is
the same thing that's produced
when a private investigator
follows you around all day.
They can't sit
close enough to you
in every café to hear
every word you're saying,
but they can be
close enough to know
when you left your house,
what the license plate
of the car
you were driving with,
where you went,
who you sat with,
how long you were there,
when you left,
where you went after that.
That's meta data.
Smith:
Now, all of this meta data,
it turns out,
was actually remarkably
east to get at. In fact,
you don't even have to
hack the phone at all.
All you need is technology
that is readily available,
called an IMSI catcher,
that can intercept
your phone's
meta data remotely.
Every phone has
what's called am IMSI,
Mm-hmm.
uh, which is actually
for the SIM card.
That's your
subscriber information.
Mm-hmm.
What your name is,
what your phone number is.
All of our devices
as they travel
throughout the day
are constantly broadcasting
in sort of this
radio orchestra.
IMSI catchers masquerade
as the legitimate
cell phone tower.
Mm-hmm.
So, when you're saying,
"Hey, cell phone tower,
can you hear me?"
Instead, a man
in the middle,
somebody with an IMSI catcher
in the trunk of their car,
in a briefcase,
in their office
has it send a louder signal
back to you
Uh-huh.
than the cell phone tower
and say,
"I'm the cell phone tower."
Now, this sounds
pretty complex.
How hard is it to-- to make
or buy an IMSI catcher?
It's incredibly easy.
You buy these things
off the shelf.
Every police department
in the United States
seems to be buying
these things nowadays.
Really?
Smith:
Now, the use
of IMSI catchers
by police recently caused
international headlines
when a newspaper in Norway
attempted to track the amount
of IMSI catchers in Oslo,
and actually found so many
that they questioned
if their tracker was
working properly.
After hiring
a cyber security firm,
they discovered that not only
were they indeed correct,
but these devices were
actually being used
to spy on their own
government facilities.
In five places in Oslo,
uh, the measurements
were so serious
that I could say
with a high probability
that there was IMSI catchers.
Foss:
The most clear signs
was in the areas
of the Prime Minister's office
and of the Ministry
of Defence.
We also got alerts
up in the Embassy's area
and in the--
in front of the Parliament.
Smith:
And while the police
initially denied using
IMSI catchers extensively,
in the face
of overwhelming evidence,
they were eventually forced
to admit it.
Foss:
The police stated
that we are using
IMSI catcher, at minimum,
once a week,
and that was
the first time ever
that the police had gone out
and stated how often
they were using
these kinds of equipment.
In all the areas
that we detected signals,
thousands of people are
strolling by every day.
So, that's-- I think that's,
uh, some of the problem
with these kinds of technology
because you're looking
for one number,
but you're in the same place.
You're collecting
hundreds of numbers.
Smith:
Now, this technology
is being used
by police forces
all over the world.
In fact,
in New York City alone,
IMSI catchers have been used
more than a thousand times
by police since 2008,
and that's just the tip
of the iceberg,
as they're now being used
all around us
all the time.
There's a joint
CIA/NSA program
called, appropriately enough,
Shenanigans.
Shenanigans was a project
to mount on airplanes
an IMSI catcher
and fly it around the city.
They can tell
when you've traveled,
they can tell when you move,
and this all happens
without warrants.
Right.
Shenanigans was
happening in Yemen.
Right.
Uh, that's where
it was being tested.
And you go, "Well, look,
this is being used
"to aim missiles
at terrorists.
I'm okay with that."
but these programs have
a disturbing frequency,
a tendency, to move
from war front to home front.
Right.
And within six months
of Shenanigans being reported,
"The Wall Street Journal"
reported that the same
technology was now
being used
domestically inside
the United States.
The FBI has a specific
aviation unit
Uh-huh.
that's flying
around cities, uh,
and frequently, they're--
they're monitoring protesters
rather than violent criminals.
With the Black Lives Matter
protests in Baltimore,
the FBI was
flying surveillance
over the protesters.
Smith:
Now, this has been
cause for alarm
because modern
surveillance technologies
are already being used
by oppressive regimes
to suppress
government opposition.
(shouting)
Ala'a Shehabi:
Since 2011,
Bahrain has witnessed
some of the largest
protests in its history.
There are thousands
of protesters
taking to the streets
who are demanding
more democratic reforms
and a change in regime.
Smith:  Ala'a Shehabi is
a Bahraini activist
who found herself the target
of government surveillance.
In 2012, I was
briefly arrested.
Immediately after
I was released,
I received a string
of four or five emails
that were very suspicious
to me.
I suspected that
this was a cyber attack,
and so I immediately sent
the suspicious emails
to my colleague,
Morgan, at Citizen Lab.
It actually turned out
that this spyware was
produced and operated
by a British-German company
called FinFisher.
This is a company
that specializes
in producing
hacking software,
and it claims that
it sells them
to government
regimes,
so that
immediately fitted
with my suspicion
that this was
the Bahraini
regime.
The spyware's capable
of switching
your microphone on,
your camera,
it's capable of logging
every single thing
that you type.
There are a handful
of key companies in Europe
that are openly marketing,
promoting, and selling
these tools
in arms exhibitions
in European capitals.
They are not being used
in the name
of tackling terrorism.
They are being used to keep
these regimes in place
and in power.
Smith:
Now, to see exactly
what type of information
a hacked phone can yield,
we contacted the same hacker
who uncovered
the Bahraini scandal
and asked him to hack
one of our own reporters
using the same
type of software
that targeted Ala'a Shehabi's.
We were able to completely
commandeer Ben's phone
and he never knew it.
Smith:
So Ben was in Pakistan
doing a shoot on polio.
So you hacked his phone
and you figured out
who he called.
Right, and so,
I mean, what we've got here
is I can see, you know,
who he's calling
and when he called them
and how long the calls were.
Wow.
We can actually
record his calls.
Wow.
Let's have a listen to them.
This will also keep a list
of Ben's web browsing history.
Wow.
Um, and so for instance,
you can see here
he's Google searching
for BBC,
you can see news articles
that he's writing.
Right.
Checking his Twitter.
It's sort of like reading
someone's mind
'cause you can sort of see
what they're thinking
while they're on the Internet.
So we've been
location tracking Ben.
You can even
get it to animate,
and so it will show
where Ben-- Ben is
at various sort of times.
You can see him traveling
around the city there
Sure.
and you can tell
exactly where he is
Right.
which is obviously,
in terms of keeping
tabs on someone,
a highly desirable thing.
¶ ¶
Marquis-Boire:
Think about anything
that the phone can do.
Mm.
Right. Like, once
you've actually installed
this malicious software
on the phone,
Mm.
then it's simply
a matter of activating
the phone's capabilities.
So, I mean, the phone has
a camera, right?
Well, now we can
turn on the camera.
What are these
ambient recordings?
And so--
Yeah, so the ambient
recording if kind of
the invisible microphone.
The-- the real
sort of spy stuff.
So he's interviewing
a Gitmo detainee--
a former Gitmo de-- detainee.
So I guess when you talk
about protecting journalists,
protecting your source
is a big issue.
Can you be said
to be practicing journalism
in a traditional sense
if you can't guarantee
source protection?
You may be sort of
actively endangering
the-- their livelihood,
welfare, and life.
Now with software like this
and the other more
commercially available
software,
it seems like
technology allows
almost anyone to spy
on almost anyone.
We live in a golden age
of convenience
enabled by technology,
and so that means that,
you know, y-- you and I can be
on other sides of the planet
and we can have
a conversation in real time
for-- for no money.
Technology has enabled
convenience of communication,
but also convenience
of surveillance.
Smith:  Now, this so called
golden age of technology
has essentially
made it possible
for anyone to spy
on anyone else.
It begs the question,
can people,
for example, journalists,
ever go dark?
Is that even possible now
with these new advancements?
How do we go black?
Well, so going black
is a-- a pretty big ask.
For me, for example,
I really know what I'm doing.
Yeah.
But if the NSA wants
to pop my box,
Uh-huh.
you know, they're totally
gonna do it.
But if you know
you're actively under threat,
if you know your phone
has been hacked,
these are ways
that you can ensure
that your phone works for you
Yeah.
rather than working
for somebody else.
You might've bought the phone,
but whoever hacked it,
they're the ones
who own it.
Wow.
Smith:
That's because third parties
can actually turn on
your phone's microphones
and cameras
without you knowing it.
Any device that's on here,
you can operate independently.
So, it's true you can
get into the phone
and turn the camera on?
Yeah, absolutely.
So, you would turn this guy on
(beep)
and you'll just heat that guy
until the solder is molten.
Notice I'm gonna be
detaching the ribbon cables
that are connecting
the camera.
As a surface mount device,
you'll be able to
just pull it off like that.
So this is the camera.
What's that?
This is the other camera.
You got two cameras
in your phone.
You got your
front-facing camera
for sort of the selfies,
and you got your
rear-facing camera that's--
I think this one has
a multi-microphone array,
Mm.
which is gonna be this guy,
this guy, and this guy.
But if you take out
the microphones,
then how do you use it
as a phone?
You would add
your own external microphone.
For example,
the iPod type earbuds
that have the mic
integrated on the lanyard.
Right. Built in.
Is there a way you can tell
if your phone's been hacked?
Perhaps the most
terrifying thing is,
if your phone had been hacked,
you would never know.
Smith:
And as "VICE" reporter
Jason Leopold found,
surveillance has become
so ubiquitous
that even
the government agencies
responsible for policing it
are not secure.
You got a FOIA request
recently in the mail
that's causing quite a stir.
The way that
this all surfaced,
Dianne Feinstein, she made
this extraordinary
Floor speech.
Smith:
As the head of the Senate
Intelligence Committee,
Feinstein delivered
some shocking allegations.
Feinstein:
On two occasions,
CIA personnel
electronically removed
Committee access
to CIA documents.
She said that
the CIA had hacked
into Senate computers
while these staffers
who work for her
were writing a report
about the CIA's
torture program.
John Brennan,
the director of the CIA
said that is preposterous.
Our only way to look
deeper into it
was to file a Freedom
of Information Act request.
So, these documents
absolutely backed up
everything that
Dianne Feinstein said.
What's most
interesting though,
what I would call
a smoking gun,
John Brennan wrote a letter
and he said that
the CIA staff had
improperly accessed
your computers.
But John Brennan
never sent this letter
to Dianne Feinstein.
They said that this letter was
was mistakenly
turned over to us.
Right.
It was an accident,
and it actually
should not have been
released to us, and, uh,
they asked us not to,
uh, post it.
Because it's embarrassing.
Completely embarrassing
for them.
And we declined
that, uh, request
because there's no
national security concerns
in this letter.
This is simply something that
John Brennan did not want
the public to see
after making all these,
uh, statements about
what the CIA did not do.
Smith:
We now know that
the CIA officers were in fact
spying on the committee
charged with keeping
them in line.
So, we spoke to one
of those committee members,
Senator Ron Wyden,
about the letter
that Brennan never meant
to send.
This will be the first time
I've ever said this publicly.
My sense is
there were clearly people
at the CIA
who understood
that what Mr. Brennan had done
was flat out wrong,
and they drafted
an apology letter.
And yet, Mr. Brennan
was just unwilling
to publicly acknowledge
wrongdoing.
This is basically
rewriting the law.
We are the agency
that is required by law
to conduct vigorous oversight
over the CIA.
We can't do vigorous oversight
over the agency
if the agency
we're supposed to
be overseeing
is in fact, uh,
secretly searching our files.
Smith:
Now, Senator Wyden
has become a leader
in attempting to rein in
our Intelligence Community.
Wyden: Director Clapper,
I want to ask you about...
Snowden:
Senator Ron Wyden said,
"Is the NSA collecting
any kind of data at all
on millions or hundreds
of millions of Americans?"
And James Clapper sort of
scratched his head...
No, sir.
and he said no...
It does not?
they do not.
Not wittingly.
The most senior
Intelligence official
in the United States
of America
raised his hand
and swore an oath
to tell the truth to Congress,
and he lied on camera.
Mm-hmm.
He wasn't charged,
despite the fact that he--
that's a felony.
He didn't even lose his job.
Mm-hmm.
He's still doing
the same thing today.
Within a few months,
he admitted that he lied.
He said his answer was
"too cute by half"...
Mm.
and the least
untruthful statement
that he felt he could have
made at the time.
Mm.
My view is that
if you're going to protect
the American people,
you've gotta embed
those protections into law.
And we of course
have been very concerned
about with what I call
secret law.
Smith:  And at the heart
of that secret law is FISA,
the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act,
which authorized
secret courts to green-light
domestic spying programs.
Wyden:
The government persuaded
the court to say,
"Well, it's okay
to collect meta data."
When you read
the fundamental law,
you hear anything
about meta data
and collecting
millions of records
on law abiding,
uh, people.
That was all done in secret.
And in fact, I went
to the floor of the Senate
and I warned that
when the American people
found out how that law
had been secretly interpreted,
they would be very angry,
and that in fact was the case.
(indistinct chanting)
Smith:  Now, public anger
hasn't been enough to end
many of these programs,
but increasingly,
the question isn't whether
or not they can be
justified under law,
but whether they're actually
effective in the first place.
Smith:  Recently there were
attacks in Paris.
What happens when you have
a terrorist attack like that
within security agencies,
with the NSA,
for example?
I was working,
uh, at the NSA
during the Boston Marathon
bombings investigation,
and as it was playing
on the news,
myself and colleagues
were in the cafeteria,
and we turned to each other
and said,
"I'll bet you anything
"we already knew
about these guys
in the databases."
And in Paris,
I'm certain that the same
conversation happened.
And this is really the legacy
of mass surveillance,
is the fact that
when you're watching everyone,
you know who
these individuals are.
They're in the banks.
You had the information
you needed to stop,
to prevent even
the worst atrocities.
But the problem is
when you cast
the net too wide,
when you're collecting
everything,
you understand nothing.
We know for a fact
that it is not effective
for stopping terrorist attacks
and it never has been.
¶ ¶
The White House appointed
two independent commissions
in the wake of my disclosures
in 2013
to review mass surveillance
programs and go,
"All right,
do these have value?
Should they be changed?
Should they the reformed?"
They looked at the evidence,
the classified evidence,
and they found,
wow, despite the fact
that this had been
going on since 2001,
it had never stopped
a single terrorist attack
in the United States.
And that's after
monitoring the phone calls
of everyone in the country.
So, that's a huge point.
So, two independent
commissions started
by the White House said
mass surveillance has not
stopped a terrorist attack.
And both of them found
that these programs
should be ended,
and then they came up
with 42 different points,
uh, for a reform
that they recommended
should happen to restrict
the use of these powers.
Mm.
The last time that
I saw a review of this,
the President only adopted
three of the 42 points.
Why?
Because they would limit
the exercise
of executive power.
This is something that
you have to understand
is not about this president.
It's about the presidency.
It's clear that
the public opposes
a majority of these policies,
Mm-hmm.
and yet politicians,
because the word
"terrorism" is involved,
Mm.
uh, they can't justify being
the one to stand, uh, up
and mal the vote
because they know
there will be
another terrorist attack
'Cause if they say no,
we're gonna--
we're gonna stop doing this,
and then there's
a terrorist attack,
they get painted
with that brush.
They know they'll be blamed
by their political opponents,
and they're right.
Mm.
Of course their political
opponents will do this.
It's the easting thing
in the world to do.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and unfortunately,
it's quite effective
because we live in a time
where the politics of fear
are the most persuasive
thing on the table.
Smith:
Now, while the debate
over surveillance
continues to rage
here in the US,
Edward Snowden
remains a fugitive
for his revelations
about the NSA,
and he had
a cautionary statement
about what's at stake.
When the world was
first introduced to you,
you made a statement
about turn-key tyranny.
What did you mean by that?
It means that
even if you trust
the government today,
what happens
when it changes?
In-- in our democracy,
we're never more than
eight years away
from a total change
of government.
Mm-hmm.
Suddenly...
everybody's vulnerable
to this individual,
and the systems are
already in place.
What happens tomorrow,
in a year,
in five years,
in ten years
when eventually we get
an individual who says,
"You know what?
Let's flip that switch
"and use the absolute,
"full extent of our technical
capabilities to ensure
the political stability
of this new administration"?
(indistinct chanting)
When we think
about the future
and where we go from here,
the question is
are we going to change
and enter sort of
a quantified world
where everywhere
you've been,
everyone you talk to,
it's indexed,
it's analyzed,
it's stored,
and it's used...
maybe against you...
Within our technologies here,
we have our license plate
reader system,
which we can capture
dozens of license plates
in the matter of a second.
...or will we recognize
the danger of that
and embrace the fact
that people should have space
to make mistakes
without judgment,
to have sort of
the unconsidered thought
or conversation
with your friend?
But if that was recorded
in a database
where, you know,
now you say,
"I think Donald Trump
should be kicked off a cliff,"
uh, and Donald Trump
becomes president someday,
Sure
and everybody
who said that ends up
getting thrown off a cliff?
Uh...
That's a very dangerous world.
And I think this really is
the question that
our political structures
are not yet comfortable
even discussing.
But whether
they like it or not,
it's a world that's coming
and we're going to
have to confront.
¶ ¶
Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org